Welcome to the introductory session on command
line environment.
Why would we want to learn about command line
environment?
Because when we are able to type out commands
then we are capable of using Linux to its
fullest extent.
We can combine these commands to form a script
and then we can use these scripts to be launched
at specific times and thereby automate some
of the tasks that we would like to do using
the Linux environmentt.
So, the command line environmentt should be
seen as not only a way by which you type out
instructions to the computer but also as a
path towards automation.
On the screen you are noticing there are two
apps that are giving you the command line
environment.
My favorite would be the app called terminal
on Ubuntu genome environment it has flexibility
to control the font size the colours etcetera.
It also can open multiple tabs as I am showing
you here.
There is another terminal emulator called
xter which is here you can see and it does
not have many of those features to customize
the appearance.
And a third terminal emulator would be ~~quick~~
guake which we activate by pressing the key
F12 and by pressing it again we can actually
deactivate.
Once you install it and run it once then it
would be in the background listening to your
command and you can open it or close it at
your wish.
There is another terminal emulator called
console which is available for the KDE environment
on Ubuntu as well as other Linux variant.
For most of the session we will actually look
at the terminal app which is acting as a terminal
emulator for us.
Let me maximize the window so that we can
see the commands clearly.
Now what you are seeing on the screen here
is called the command prompt.
So, if you just keep pressing the enter key
then you will see that the shell is asking
you for some input and it is prompting you
for that by showing this string and this string
is called as the command prompt.
And you can actually know clear the screen
by typing the command clear and the cursor
will be taken to the top of the window.
Now one of the first things that we must do
when we open a command line environment is
to check where are we with respect to the
files system, pwd is a command to show you
the present working director and normally
you will see that you are in the home directory.
When you first login and open the thermal
environment you will be placed in the home
directory of that particular user you are
logged into.
In this case the home directory slash home
slash user name which is what is configured
for this particular account.
The next thing that we normally do is to type
ls which is to list the names of all the folders
or files that are in this current directory.
And you would see that there are certain folders
available as part of the genome environment
desktop documents downloads pictures videos
etcetera.
And you want to know what shell is actually
responding to our commands, you may want to
list the processes that are running right
now and you would notice that there is a bash
that is running.
So, our shell that we are interacting with
using this terminal emulator is bash shell.
There are many other shells that we will come
to that in a moment and what operating system
are we using that you could actually know
by typing the command uname and let us say
we run many such commands and we would like
to clear the screen we could type the command
clear and press enter and the entire display
will be clear.
You could also for example type a command
and the press control l to also clear the
screen and after you have played around a
bit you want to exit what you would do is
type the command exit to come out of the shell.
Alternatively you can also press control d.
So, I can now press control d and come out
of the shell we have an extent that is running
in the background we would like to come out
of that.
So, we would type exit and then come out of
that.
And when I press F12 I am opening the ~~quack~~
guake terminal and you could of course you
can exit from that also but when you press
F12 again another shell is actually shown
to you.
And I can run the same commands there and
get the same output irrespective of the shell
or the terminal emulator the commands that
you are sending are being responded from the
operating system.
Now let us suggest to wrap up what we have
discussed till now.
So, what have we been doing now.
So, what we did was we opened a terminal emulator
and most of the things we did was on terminal
app and we ran some commands pwd present working
directory ~~tells~~, ls to list the folders
are files in the directory, ps to look at
the processes that are running in that particular
shell, uname to look at what is the operating
system, that is actually responding.
So, these are the some of the commands that
we started off and if you were able to clear
the screen by pressing control L and also
come out of the shell by pressing control
D.
Now if you look at what we have been doing
there is command prompt that is there and
then there is a command that we have written.
So, let us look at the anatomy of the spiritual
command.
So, you see that when we write a command the
command prompt in front of the command has
many portions which can be configured separately
we will discuss about that when we come to
the variable called ps1.
For now you see that the command prompt has
the user name and then an ~~ad~~ at symbol
after that the name of the machine followed
by a colon and then the path where the command
is being executed and then a dollar to signal
that from then onwards you can actually start
typing and the comment that we typed is ls
and sometimes for some of the commands we
need to give some options and here is an example
ls -a.
So, let us look at how this comment would
look like.
Now let us look at these commands a little
more in detail.
So, we have type command ls to look at what
all the files that are in the current directory.
We can actually now give an option to that
command, I would give an option -a.
So, most of the Linux options would have hyphen
or a minus sign in front of them and you would
see that there are a lot more files are being
displayed.
So, by this -a option will list files which
also have dot in front of them which means
that those are basically hidden from the user
for routine operation.
So, if you press ls you would see the files
that are used by the user in a routine manner
and -a if you give as an option then ls would
give you the hidden files also which are having
a dot in the first possession of the name.
And if you press ls -l the list of files is
displayed in a different manner this is called
the ~~long~~ long format and we will discuss
these fields in detail in a moment.
You can get help on any command in the Linux
thanks to the manual pages that come bundled
along with the operating system.
And you can pass on any command name as an
argument to the command man and then get help
on it.
So, let us ask for a manual page on the command
ls and you can see the help for the ls command
you can read this to expand the scope of how
the ls command would work for you.
The most frequent options that are used with
ls are ls -a to list all the files and ls
-l to list the files in a long format.
So, here is what we have done we have run
the command man with the argument ls.
So, that we are looking at the manual page
for the ls command to understand various options
that can go along with the ls command.
Now the manual pages come in many sections
and this is just a textbook information to
let you know that the manual pages cover various
aspects of the operating system and the section
one is where the shell commands are being
described.
So, you can actually ask man pages to be displayed
in the section one for the command ls.
So, here what happens is that when you type
man space 1 space ls, 1 becomes an option
and ls becomes an argument.
Let us explore the file system of a Linux
operator system.
Luckily for us the file system hierarchy standard
version 3.0 is what is followed by all the
Linux opening systems irrespective of the
variant that we are using.
So, we are using the Ubuntu 20.04 lts version
and you could shift to another version of
Linux and you would see that the folders will
have the same name and they will be located
in the same hierarchy as we will be exploring
shortly.
Why do we need to understand how the file
system hierarchy is?
The reason is that when we log to the system
and when we open a command line environment
in a shell we are placed at a particular location
in the hierarchy namely our home directory
and we have permissions to create files in
that directory and perhaps also in some other
directory such as slash temp but we do have
read access to many files that are there in
several folders and we should be able to traverse
the hierarchy.
And locate commands corresponding to specific
applications that we would like to run and
very often we need to identify the right location
of a library file because it is required for
some compilation of a program.
The files corresponding to libraries are header
files to compile our codes and the ability
to traverse the file system hierarchy will
actually determine how soon we are able to
debug our difficulties with respect to compilation
requirement and get on with the program development.
So, it is very useful to familiarize ourselves
with file system hierarchy of Linux.
So, here is a sample of the file system hierarchy
the forward slash or slash simply is the root
directory and that is a starting point for
the file system hierarchy.
This character forward slash is also used
as a field separator to indicate the path
to any directory.
As we see now let us say for example we want
to refer to this directory called bin which
is under directly called user then you would
write that part for this bin as slash user
slash bin.
And you would see that there are a number
of directories with specific names which will
actually have their meaning as described in
the file system hierarchy standard 3.0.
The user directory is here the home directory
for a user and under the home directory there
are folders which are created by the operating
system while creating that account and there
are also folders that the user can create
for herself or himself.
We can explore the file system hierarchy by
first understanding how to actually construct
the path of any directory.
So, forward slash is the root of the file
system and also the ~~delivered~~ delimeter
for the subdirectories.
And in every directory there are two special
files one is called the dot which is referring
to the current director and the other is double
dot which is referring to the parent directory.
So, if you type the command cd space dot nothing
will happen because you are trying to change
the directory to the current directory.
So, there is no change in the directly position.
If you type the command cd space double dot
then you are going one level up in the file
system hierarchy.
So, you could ~~travel~~ traverse the file
system hierarchy up and down by changing the
directory.
If you want to go from the user's home directory
upwards you would say cd space double dot
and then you would be home directly and then
series double dot you will be in the root
directory.
From the root directory if you actually give
the absolute path you could actually go anywhere
you wish or you could actually use a cd with
the name of the directory to traverse one
level at a time.
Let us explore the file system hierarchy using
the system where we are trying to demonstrate
I become an environment.
So, where am I right now?
I am in the home directory of the user I am
logged into and when I type ls I see that
there are certain files that are listed ~~herw~~
here and when I press ls space -a then we
notice that there are two special files here
one that is dot and another that is double
dot.
There is a special directory called double
dot which is allowing us to traverse one level
up in the hierarchy.
So, let me change my ~~director~~ directory
to one level up and you would now see that
we are now in slash home.
And if I type this ~~comment~~ command once
more then we are in the root folder verify
that we are in the root folder using the pwd
command.
Now if I press cd then we are going back to
the home ~~director~~ directory which means
that the cd without any arguments will take
you to the home directory.
I know press control l clear the screen.
Now let me go back to the root folder and
using ls we will see that there are certain
folders that are there in the root folder
an get the -l option we can actually see the
long format and it actually indicates several
things about the file system that we can already
start getting familiarized.
For example the very first character shows
that there is an l here and for some directories
it is d and the difference between these two
is that the l indicates a symbolic link.
So, which means that the bin folder of the
root ~~territory~~ directory is actually a
symbolic link to a folder with the same name
in the user directory and the d here means
that it is actually a directory by itself
in the particular location.
Now boot directory the Linux kernel is located
which is what gets executed when the system
is starting up and there are many such directors
here let us explore one of them.
So, we will go to the user directory and then
from there we can go down to the bin director
and let us look at what are the files that
are there?
There is a lot of files that are here and
many of these are actually commands that we
would be using as we go along learning the
command line and environment and we can now
go back to the home directory verify that
we are in the home directory.
In this manner we can actually traverse the
hierarchy of the file system and explore what
is there in which folder.
Now let us look at the organization of these
folders as per the file system hierarchy standard.
The bin directory in the root folder should
contain the essential command binaries or
executables.
These are the commands that every user in
the system are supposed to be able to run.
Sometimes this folder can be a link to the
folder in slash user slash bin and that is
a matter of only a choice from the company
that packages the Linux for you.
Boot folder contains the boot order which
is what executes when system starts.
Dev folder contains the device file.
One says that in Linux everything is a file.
So, every device that is corrected to the
computer is actually a file as far as the
representation is concerned in the file system
hierarchy.
Etc folder contains configurations of various
services which are specific to that particular
machine.
The lib folder will contain the libraries
are shared programs as well as kernel modules.
The media folder will contain folders which
are created when you insert a removable device
into the computer.
For example if you insert a usb disk then
in the media folder a folder is available
this will contain the file system for the
usb stick which you can explore and when you
unbound or eject the usb stick then that folder
will also disappear.
Now slash mnt is a folder where you could
have mount points that is directories which
are made available to traverse the file system
of those respective hardware or hard disk.
Slash opt is a folder where application software
packages are installed particularly in high
performance computing environment.
Run is a file system to have the data for
the running processes.
Sbin is a directory where the executables
meant for system administration are kept.
It is expected that normal users in the routine
operation of the system do not require to
execute any command which is located in this
particular folder, srv is a folder that contains
the data for ftp or http services, tmp is
a folder where temporary files are located
every user will have permission to write files
to this particular folder.
And one should not expect such files to be
available after the rebooting because in many
computers the configuration would be such
that upon reporting the slash time will be
cleaned up.
Slash user is a secondary hierarchy for the
file system which is shareable by that we
mean when you have a high performance computing
environment then you could have the user directory
shared across multiple computers.
So, that you do not have to actually have
that much of hard disk uh space replicated
across all the computer.
Slash var is a folder where variable data
is stored such as the log files for various
system services that are running in the background.
Now let us come back to the command prompt
and look at these directories.
So, we go back to the root folder and you
see that there is user directory and in that
there is a bin directory and you have got
all these commands.
And we also noticed the slash etc.
So, look at what is all there in slash etc
you would see that a whole bunch of files
are named as dot ~~con~~ conf which is basically
the configuration for those respective ~~surfaces~~
services.
And slash var is a folder where we said that
the log files will be located and they are
all in this folder called log and you would
see that there are logs that are created for
various services.
Now let us look at the slash dev folder and
you would see that the display would have
a different character in the long format of
the file listing.
The c here shows that it is actually a character
file which means that you could read from
that particular device a character by character
which is typical of ~~uh~~ devices such as
the terminal.
And there are some files which would actually
have the first character as b and these are
called as block devices particularly it is
for the hard disks.
So, when you want to read from a hard disk
you would read one block at a time typically
a block would be either 512 bytes or 1 kilobyte
or even 4 kilobytes depending upon the configuration
and the Linux typically it is one kilobyte.
So, if you see these devices which are listed
as sda 1 up to 7 these are block devices which
are available as files as far as the file
system is concerned.
Let us look at the slash lib folder and you
will see that this folder would contain many
files that would have a pattern which would
have a number in the end which is typical
of a library files with version numbers that
are there as a part part of the file name.
You can now explore the file system at your
convenience and as long as you are using the
commands like cd and ls there is nothing that
you can go wrong and make yourself familiar
with the file system hierarchy and understand
which part of the hierarchy is your home directory
and everything below that hierarchy is what
is owned and writable for you.
So, you could actually play around with it.
And you will notice that you cannot actually
do much changes to the file system hierarchy
beyond your home directory which is characteristic
of the secure manner by which the file system
is configured in the Linux operating system.
Before we wrap up let us look at the hierarchy
of the user and var folders which is quite
extensive.
So, in the user hierarchy the secondary hierarchy
you would have a user bin folder which will
contain commands that every user is expected
to be able to run.
And there is a folder called user lib where
library files are located, user local is a
directly where certain applications which
are specific for that particular system are
installed which may not be common for all
the operator systems in that particular variant.
User sbin is ~it directly~ a directory where
system administration executables are located
but these are non vital because the vital
ones are available in slash sbin itself.
What do we mean by that?
It is that when the machine is in a single
user mode or in maintenance mode then executables
which are required to mount the file systems
are performed system administration tasks
that are not dependent on any network or any
remotely located file systems that are mounted
on the system then you would actually use
uh slash sbin.
User share is a folder where the architecture
dependent data is stored.
User include is a directory where the header
files for C programs are all to be found.
So, when you started the helloworld program
in C for example stdio dot h is a header file
that you include and you would see that it
is located in this particular folder.
User src would be containing the source code
of various applications that are installed
on the Linux operating system if you have
chosen to installed those package.
The var hierarchy is also important because
we need to know where to find the log files.
So, in var log the log files for various services
will be located and in var temp some of the
temporary files that are to be preserved between
the reports will be locate.
And vr log is a place where the log files
are there for processes which would like to
have exclusive access to certain files during
certain operations that prevent any clash
of information, var lib is a variable state
information.
Now here is some logic or reason why there
are such folders with this kind of a hierarchy.
So, what we mean by a shareable folder is
that a file system which can be shared across
computers this is essentially to conserve
the storage and also to provide uniform uh
file system to multiple computers particularly
in high performance computing environment.
And sometimes you also have what is called
the static and variable kind of file systems
or directories.
The static ones are ones which do no during
the regular operation of the computer whereas
variable ones would change.
For example when an email comes a folder corresponding
to that particular users inbox would change.
So, that would be in the variable folder such
as var by mail by the user name.
However when you execute commands the executables
are not going to change and they will always
static files there are some folders which
cannot be shared across computers because
they contain configuration specific to that
particular computer.
Slash etc and slash put are some such folders
and there are some such folders which are
not shareable across computers as well as
they are also variable with the regular operation
of the computer like for example var lock
or var run
So, this is a logic why there are different
folders and a standard has been defined to
ensure that users who log into machines can
actually identify these folders irrespective
of the specific version of the operating system
they are using.
And across the Linux variance you would find
that the file system hierarchy is maintained.
And this helps us navigate the file system
hierarchy and locate the files that we are
looking for to execute them or to use them
for linking purpose while we compare some
of our programs.
I hope you got a sense of the file system
hierarchy and I urge you to explore the command
line environment and make yourself familiar
with the file system of your own computer.
And you would soon be comfortable with locating
files that would arrive onto your computer
as you run commands or download things and
move around the files for your work.